Satana
======

Version 0.666

Satana (Saturation Analogique) is a LADSPA plugin which can be used with any
compatible host, such as Audacity. It tries hard to simulate an analogue
saturation device, like a magnetic tape recorder whose VU meters are stuck
in the red, or a tube amplifier's push-pull stage. In my opinion, it fails, but
musicians may nonetheless find the resulting effect interesting.

It begins with an optional compressor, which does the evil part, then applies a
convolution matrix acting as a low-pass filter on each signal point, with a
twist: when the point is at the maximum (0 dB), the signal is totally filtered,
while near zero, the dry signal stays almost untouched. The default application
function is non-linear (a power curve) in order to convolve mostly when
approaching the maximum intensity; B&eacute;zier curves could do the job as
well. The processing speed depends on the nature and the complexity of the
function.  Interestingly, additional high-order harmonics (unwanted
low-intensity noise) are created while applying the low-pass filter.

The first control, _Compression_, applies compression to the selection through
a recursive sine function, a little bit of asymmetric clipping being added to 
make things interesting. 0 does nothing; 5 is too much, generating a truckload
of harmonics and distortion. I know you will try.

The second cursor, _Selectivity_, controls the exponential function 
parameter. `exp(0) = 1` means the signal is totally filtered, leading 
to a severe loss of high frequencies, while `exp(10)` means only the very few 
samples near 0dB are affected.

The third one, _Efficiency_, gives the odd number of Savitzky-Golay filter 
coefficients which are used to smooth out the signal: 5, 7, 9... 25 (here,
12=13, 14=15, etc.) More coefficients give a lower cutoff frequency. I
don't know how to compute this frequency, if it is at all possible... 
The point is probably moot when filtering varies with the wavepoints'
amplitude.

The last one, _Volume_, is used to reduce the gain when it gets massive.

To sum up, the idea is to create a lot of harmonics, then weed them out
selectively in the higher parts of the signal in order to attenuate distortion
harshness.

Copyright (C) Jean Zundel <jzu@free.fr> 2012

Free software, licensed under the GNU GPL v3.

Compiling
---------

The `ladspa.h` file, included in this project, comes from the ladspa-sdk
package and allows to compile the plugin without installing the whole package.
Type:

`make`

`sudo make install`

That's about it. You can now use the plugin.

A precompiled Darwin/MacOSX binary, built on 2012-04-29, is available at 
[http://jzu.free.fr/Binaries/osx-satana\_4742.so](http://jzu.free.fr/Binaries/osx-satana\_4742.so) 
for easy installation. It should be copied in 
`/Library/Audio/Plug-ins/LADSPA` (system-wide install) or 
`~/Library/Audio/Plug-ins/LADSPA` (user local install).

Running
-------

Once the `satana_4742.so` library has been copied to `/usr/lib/ladspa/` (or
any other suitable installation folder),
enter Audacity and choose a victim^W track. Go to 
*Effects > Modules... > Satana...*. You can begin by setting _Compression_ to 
2, _Selectivity_ to 5 and _Efficiency_ to 15, then experiment with
other, bolder values.

This plugin serves several purposes. You can use it to soften a
digitally-clipped track (_Compression_ to 0, _Selectivity_ and _Efficiency_ at
mid-course); you can "enhance" the sound with compression; you can also
massively distort it (set _Compression_ to 4 or 5, a low value for
_Selectivity_, and _Efficiency_ above 15).

